TITLE: Beauty and truth are one 
OUTLET: tumblr

Although it has become common to cast aside both religion and virtue, classically defined, as no longer needed in the new age of man, and to mock metaphysics for its abstruseness and irrelevance, the day demands something else. It demands the essential. 

Essence is such that is, but "is' not as a property of itself, but as its essence. That is to say, that for essence, being has no other property than itself, and this implies the necessity of this one property. Where other things are polyvalent, and exist in binary pairs, essence exists only in unity. To further unravel the mystery of being, let us examine a composite form. It contains properties, which may or may not exist. For a table, it may or may not have legs. If it is a legless table, it may violate the properties of being a table, but it cannot violate the property of being. The primary property is unitary.

The problems that attend existence are manifold. There is an explosion of properties, and with it an explosion of virtues. Each virtue implies excellence with respect to a particular property. Something may be well-proportioned, something we may recognized in a bust, a human breast, or a well-wrought table, or well-tempered, as we recognize with the arms of steel, the utensils we use to cook, and the tools with which we set about our garden. 

However, when we return to essence, there is no problem other than the unitary one. There is no possibility of virtue, there is simply being. One exists or does not exist. In that 'not' existing, there is simply nothing there. As soon as there is something, essence is. 

The relation of these properties and attending virtues to original essence is clear enough. Essence motivates excellence. This is a strange way of putting about the phrasing, but the extent to which something is excellent is dependent, largely, on the extent to which it is. 

This is how we arrive at the classical concept of virtue, and it is important that we understand how we arrived. There is the danger, in discussing virtues relating to properties, that virtue itself be seen as an aggregate of excellence of properties, when in fact, just the reverse is true. It is virtue which is the ennobling force which allows for the existence of virtue in other properties, it is immersion in being itself. 

Here, we may simply say that the stoics may have been more right than the Christians in refusing to specify the root, only to say that it is rooted in nature, which itself, by the same means, reveals excellence in flowers and fruits. The focus on the human case is unfruitful, leading to special considerations that, in divorcing humans from their greater context, in fact destroys the unique potentially of humankind. 

This is to say that humans may or may not be. The human is uniquely suited to have a discourse about the nullity and reality, participation and abnegation, removal from the flow and the immersion in it. If his ability to speak meaningfully is born from his participation, his ability to reflect is born from his ability to distance, to consider his own state.

This is the birth of will and it is important to stress the uniqueness of the human approach to will. It is the ability to stand distant and the ability to move near, and to chose from a standpoint of "the knowledge of good and evil." It is a strange and curious feat and possibility; much of the human drama hangs on it even to this day, on this reflective, even suicidal faculty. 

The fact that we are alive is a great feat also, for in being alive we are choosing to live after having reflect on our state. This unites the idea of unity, virtue, with the power to unify, or valor. In the context of the Dao De Jing, this is the "way," or Dao, and the "de," or power. In practical sense, they are the same, but they depart from primordial unity in the mind of him who is newly able to reflect on his existence. 

The reflection and the action, the thought and the moving, the goal and the completion are no longer the same, but there is the possibility of unifying them. This brings us to the first virtue of truth, which is intimately related to these poles. In the classical sense, for example that we find in Confucian documents, truth is not the property of a word or phrase, it is the property of a person. We might call him "realized," "truthful," or "sincere," although in modern parlance probably we will find the best usage stemming from now antique religious terminology. That is, he is "faithful."

The faithful person is the one for whom here is no distance between word and action, his ability to speak has him uttering only words that are in accordance with the acts he will perform. However, it is possible that a word can be even more potent or a phrase more pregnant because it issues from being itself.  

We have already considered the separation of "idea" and "action," and we can see the same idea approached in the lens of logos, the patterning of the idea. Just as there is a "heavenly torah," there is a "word" that is writ upon the sky for all to see, swirling with intimate patterning of the clouds. 

One diversion useful for modern man might be the glittering world of mathematics, which bespeaks the mysteries of the Pythagorean, or others who dreadfully dug into the mysteries of mother nature, unearthing not merely golden stones, but the formulas which governed the movements of the heavenly bodies and the movements of objects subject to the earth's own gravity. So Galileo stands in earthly triumph, just as Darwin or Columbo, for circumscribing the globe and revealing the pattern of the mother's mysteries.  

However, these patterns which we find in mathematical formulas and became known to those who contemplated the night sky, are not the only patterns, and the structure of weave and weft can be found along the wainscoting of a country church, or in hastily written poem of a shivering church mouse. This is why the poet stands over the philosopher in Aristotle's own poetic weaving, there are mysteries which lend themselves not easily to words, and which are better versed in song. 

Notes and harmonies and rhythms are born along with the nymphs and satyrs. It is the idea which has reached its fruition in this form that we call beauty. Here, it is the same reconciliation as before, the same unity achieved, yet without recourse to speech as normally conceived. 

Might we say, "beauty and truth are one" ? Surely. Verily. They are one at their best, when the Dies Irae trembles from the pen of Mozart, when the Sibyls and Psalms resound in a single chorus, when the ancient potentate of rhyme is reconciled to the lamb that was slain. But they may also diverge, just as we also diverge from the simple truth by neglecting the rhythm of the hoe as it digs into the soil, by failing to open our eyes to the might of the sun as it falls on the naked earth, or following some new pfeifer's tune as it leads us away from the earth our mother to the gaping maw of the dragon of the sea.



 




