TITLE:The power of sharing
OUTLET: OuiShare
P_TITLE:
LINK:

If we are commonly pursuing a common good, what is it? There is a struggle and a danger of representing as a material good what is primarily a matter of attitude. Sharing, or collaboration, is a matter of shared spirit, not merely shared material goods. And to learn how to share, we first need to reflect on the spirit of giving. Why do we share? Why do we give?

Very often when we give we do not receive anything in return now, or perhaps ever. The most obvious example of this is parenting. It takes a tremendous amount of effort to have a kid, both time and money and love. Loving is very rarely free. 

We need children in the world, both because we always need to be reminded of the need to give, and because so many of our collaborative projects are like little children. We pour time and love into them because we believe that, like children, they will grow up in the right time, becoming something beautiful that makes a positive impact in the world.

Consequently, we share our energy because we believe that life is made up of more than material objects. It is made up by the positive energy that we put into it. And economies built around positive energy are, unsurprisingly, more positive than those built around building more objects for the sake of having more objects. 

The positive energy we bring to things is what makes us happy and fulfilled, it is like music that plays in the background of our hearts. The "material economy," which assaults us with large amounts of numbers, often make us think that those numbers are what is most important. But in gaining the ability to create spreadsheets, do we lose the ability to feel?

I am often reminded here of life in the countryside in Italy, where I try to spend as much time as possible walking among the open fields. They are brimming with fresh crops, the festivals of the farmers, and the joy of a life well lived and fully enjoyed. Here, in the midst of the Umbrian countryside, we have have joy because we have not lost the primary value of human kindness.  The joy of the festivals and families is the celebration of life. 

I am immensely indebted to my neighbors because they share love with me. This love often comes in the form of food, either the fresh zucchini I will gather today, the marmalade from the fruits of the field that I enjoyed with a piece of fresh baked bread this morning, or the feast that we will enjoy together as the crops are gathered. All requires time and effort to produce, but it is given freely.

Because it is given freely, the heart is moved to respond with the same. There is no contract for a pound of flesh. If I am indebted, it is only  because I know that what I receive is so much greater than what I give. I have only a single fig tree and the figs are not yet ripe. Yet the spirit of kindness makes me hope to have more in order to give more. To return the love I have received out of love, instead of out of obligation. 

I am reminded also, that when it comes to the fruit of the soil, I consume far more than I produce. if I turn the food that is necessary to feed the body into thoughts or words, I also am dependent on those who, at this very moment, are out gathering the harvest. 

Here, we are all dependent on each other. Sometimes others have more than I do. Things that I could use. Today, my neighbors have fresh zucchini and green beans, which I will take and eat. Perhaps tomorrow it will be something else, something more than words. 

It may not be possible to engineer a system without debt, but it is possible to create community where people give for the sake of giving. In a world stacked like a bunch of dominoes around ever larger piles of debt, waiting to collapse and destroy us all, sharing is more than an alternative lifestyle. 

Sharing produces a new world which has love, not debt, as its foundation.