TITLE: Why Christians need collaboration
OUTLET: TBD (Other Journal? Mother Jones?)

Christians can reclaim the spirit of the commons, the idea of community that is free from materialistic. As Brian Chesky, founder of AirBnB, notes this is "old school," in leveraging new forms of social media and global connectedness to reclaim old communal patterns. OuiShare, the French-founded community dedicated to collaborative consumption that I am a core member of, despite being organized on top of Facebook groups with thousands of dedicated people, strongly emphasizes MPRL, an acronym that stands for "meet people in real life."

If there is a formula here, it might be that the more that we meet people in real life with common values, the more that we have community. And healthy community has a tendency to grow, both in depth of relationships, and breadth, as the vision of the community transforms the world. 

Community is transformative; this was the vision of the early Christian church. For more than a hundred years after its founding, there were no formal creeds, no value statement, nothing other than the commitment to live in common with a transformative social vision. 

Here, it was the church that recognized that a social vision is itself spiritual. Empowering those who were neglected by society allowed them to take on new responsibility. To reach out was not a broadcast on a radio, but the touch given to a leper or outcast that allowed them to take on hope. 

The church was the nexus of a powerful social vision, one that could not be reconciled with late imperial hierarchies and other statist structures. This was also the recipe of the protestant reformation, american revolution, and other transformative movements since. The hierarchy so often becomes a geriarchy. Age, if it is sometimes a proxy for wisdom, is no substitute for it. Kings, even if we elect them, so often become little more than tyrants. 

One of the things that the collaborative economy offers the community-minded Christian is that it is not an enemy of private property. The idea of sharing drives at empowering the individual to give more in order to gain more. He or she engages with a global community. It is a message of individual empowerment and free choice, rather than a coercive extraction made by another. This is why "peer to peer" is often used. It is the choice of the individual to engage, not the choice of another. 

The Christian might argue that these global networks are missing a broader message of love. But if it is missing, who will bring it? Love is always first displayed in transformative action, only second in words. Those that are out building global communities are the givers, and if others will rush to write commentary, it is only commentary. 

The moment is now.  Now is an excellent time for Christians to begin to utilize these new global networks in order to share, because it makes sense to share. Giving is more blessed than receiving. 

Christians have often claimed that Marx transformed classical Christian themes into a materialist escaton, turning healthy community into deadly communism. However, what is needed now is more than commentary on the excesses and flaws of Marxism, it is articulating an engaged philosophy of living that represents communal human life in an age of machines.  

Even more urgent is the the need of living that life, to seize the moment to emphasize the true value of community when financial overlords are seeking nothing other than extraction. 

'Lo, I tell you, political and social transformation is at hand. 

Joel Dietz is co-editor of Ouishare.net and founder of Evergreen (http://evr.gr)

